Overview :: LocalAI

Why LocalAI?

What’s Included

Getting Started
Recommended: Docker Installation

Key Features

Community and Support

Next Steps

License

LocalAI > 

Overview

Beginners

Overview

LocalAI is your complete AI stack for running AI models locally. It’s designed to be simple, efficient, and accessible, providing a drop-in replacement for OpenAI’s API while keeping your data private and secure.

Why LocalAI?

In today’s AI landscape, privacy, control, and flexibility are paramount. LocalAI addresses these needs by:

Privacy First: Your data never leaves your machine

Complete Control: Run models on your terms, with your hardware

Open Source: MIT licensed and community-driven

Flexible Deployment: From laptops to servers, with or without GPUs

Extensible: Add new models and features as needed

What’s Included

LocalAI is a single binary (or container) that gives you everything you need:

OpenAI-compatible API — Drop-in replacement for OpenAI, Anthropic, and Open Responses APIs

Built-in Web Interface — Chat, model management, agent creation, image generation, and system monitoring

AI Agents — Create autonomous agents with MCP (Model Context Protocol) tool support, directly from the UI

Multiple Model Support — LLMs, image generation, text-to-speech, speech-to-text, vision, embeddings, and more

GPU Acceleration — Automatic detection and support for NVIDIA, AMD, Intel, and Vulkan GPUs

Distributed Mode — Scale horizontally with worker nodes, P2P federation, and model sharding

No GPU Required — Runs on CPU with consumer-grade hardware

LocalAI integrates LocalAGI (agent platform) and LocalRecall (semantic memory) as built-in libraries — no separate installation needed.

Getting Started

LocalAI can be installed in several ways. Docker is the recommended installation method for most users as it provides the easiest setup and works across all platforms.

Recommended: Docker Installation

The quickest way to get started with LocalAI is using Docker:

docker run -p 8080:8080 --name local-ai -ti localai/localai:latest-cpu

Then open http://localhost:8080 to access the web interface, install models, and start chatting.

For GPU support, see the Container images reference or the Quickstart guide.

For complete installation instructions including Docker, macOS, Linux, Kubernetes, and building from source, see the Installation guide.

Key Features

Text Generation: Run various LLMs locally (llama.cpp, transformers, vLLM, and more)

Image Generation: Create images with Stable Diffusion, Flux, and other models

Audio Processing: Text-to-speech and speech-to-text

Vision API: Image understanding and analysis

Embeddings: Vector representations for search and retrieval

Function Calling: OpenAI-compatible tool use

AI Agents: Autonomous agents with MCP tool support

MCP Apps: Interactive tool UIs in the web interface

P2P & Distributed: Federated inference and model sharding across machines

Community and Support

LocalAI is a community-driven project. You can:

Join our Discord community

Check out our GitHub repository

Contribute to the project

Share your use cases and examples

Next Steps

Ready to dive in? Here are some recommended next steps:

Install LocalAI - Start with Docker installation (recommended) or choose another method

Quickstart guide - Get up and running in minutes

Explore available models

Model compatibility

Try out examples

Join the community

License

LocalAI is MIT licensed, created and maintained by Ettore Di Giacinto.
 Ettore Di Giacinto
 Mar 30, 2026

Search

 Home

Overview

Installation

Getting started

News

Features

Integrations

Advanced

References

FAQ

More

 Star us on GitHub

 GitHub

 Discord

 X/Twitter

Theme
Zen DarkNeonAuto

Clear History

© 2023-2025 Ettore Di Giacinto
